# Bounce Back

When Jen insisted that I sleep in the guest room, I felt helpless.  I could not dismiss her concerns: hell, I was surprised it took her so long to express them.  Instead, I felt helpless.  Feeling angry, and desperately, but ineffectively, combating that anger, was all I felt I had ever known.  The first night I slept in the guest bed, I fell asleep thinking "I do not know another way, therefore I will lose my wife, my son, and my unborn son".  It's hard to sleep thinking thoughts like that.  It's hard to feel like there is any hope with thoughts like that.

The next day, I reestablished my search for therapists dealing with anger management.  I studiously avoided the therapist I had seen a year and a half ago.

To my good fortune, the first therapist I contacted responded to my voicemail withing 24 hours.  I setup an appointment with her on a Thursday.

In my very first therapy session, after listening to me for about 40 minutes, my therapist got up, went to her filing cabinet, pulled a single sheet of paper from a large stack of identical copies, and handed it to me.

It was a list of ["thought distortions" much like these listed here](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Cognitive_distortion).  I skimmed the list and felt like someone had handed me the map to my brain.  We reviewed each type of distortion and she asked me to write down any time I discovered I had a thought similar to the distortions in the list.  Later I came to understand this process is [cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Cognitive_behavioral_therapy).

I'm a computer guy, so I immediately created [a Google form](http://goo.gl/forms/ao5T96d8k5) that you can [copy if you want](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1VnrzOAtc1J-Sz5LtP8HpgVOYF8qbS3tavDNyYvshGJY/copy) and started filling it out.

By the end of the first day I had a couple dozen entries and when I read over the entries, it was like a crazy person had filled it out.  I'd encounter an innocuous event, greatly misinterpret it, and then respond poorly because of my misinterpretation.  Instead of feeling concerned or forlorn, I felt inspired.  Here were my thoughts, out in the open, revealing that I did indeed have a well-understood way of misinterpreting the world, and there was a well-established way to address it.

I called my parents, the friends upon which I always feel most safe to fall back on, and explained to them that Jen and I had hit a bad patch in our marriage, but that I was holding in my hands the solution to the problem.  They were concerned, but did their best to be optimistic.  And, as always, they were supportive.

The first night I had this list in hand, I began to review some of the more egregious events I could think of in my past.  With this list in hand, memories of events where I had clearly lost control and become off-the-wall upset no longer felt like sources of shame that I wished to suppress.  They became interesting case studies which I could review and mine for information about how I was suffering from thought distortions.  I was no longer scared of these memories.  I could review them, dissect them, then release them because, yes, I had behaved in a way that made me ashamed, but now I had _learned_ something from them, rather than used those memories to reinforce my fear that I was a terrible person.  Now they served to help educate me about what kinds of thoughts and feelings I was prone to and should notice as evidence that I was going off the rails.  They helped train my brain to throw up a warning when "the train was about to leave the station".

I can't begin to describe how important this change of perspective was for me.  Instead of feeling like any emotional outburst was a source of shame and embarrassment, something to be suppressed and hopefully (but rarely) forgotten, I felt like it was an *opportunity* to understand more about what kind of cognitive distortion I was wrestling with at the time.  I finally felt safe reviewing these memories that once caused me shame and anxiety because I had a tool that would let me dispassionately process the event and learn something from it.  What an empowering feeling!

I'm a bit obsessive (truly, not just a figure of speech :-) and so I immediately paired that obsessiveness up with CBT and obsessively sought to expose any and all thought distortions I was having.  After just a few days, I stopped bothering with the form and just went through the process of filling it out in my head.

I made tremendous progress within a few weeks and felt _much_ better.  I finally started to feel less anxious and upset all the time because I stopped suffering from so many thought distortions.  I became remotely pleasant to be around again.  I started to look forward to things again.

But it was very difficult to maintain my vigilance against all the thought distortions.  I started to feel a bit overwhelmed and worn down after a few months.  I was still *far* better than I was when I started therapy, but I felt like I was plateauing.

My therapist had advised I seek out medication for some of my OCD issues, and after discussing with my wife, we agreed to try see a psychiatrist together.  The psychiatrist prescribed [Sertraline](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Sertraline).  I responded quickly to the medication, though I'm told it takes 8-12 weeks for the full effect to kick in.  I suffered some of the more common side-effects for several months, but would say they are all but gone now.

I had been worried that the medication would change me, that I wouldn't be *me* anymore.  Totally didn't happen.  I felt more relaxed, more in control, and more happy, but I was still as focused, intelligent, and engaged as I had always been.  And best of all, my thought distortions started to quiet down.  When I would have a distortion, it felt like the meds gave me just an extra split-second to collect myself, just long enough to address the situation calmly.  I finally felt like I had breathing room, that I wasn't constantly wrestling with myself, and when I needed to wrestle, I won definitely.  For the first time in a *long* time I felt like I could pick and choose how I wanted to behave in and react to the world around me.

Honestly, just with the CBT and without the meds, I'd probably have been OK.  The CBT was a perfect match for my personality type and honestly, without the CBT I think the meds would be rather ineffective.  The meds give me breathing room and clarity of thought, but if I didn't have the tools CBT gives me to address my distorted thoughts, I'd simply have breathing room and clarity of thought to generate more distorted thoughts without knowing how to address them.  I have a friend much like me who is simply on meds and not going to therapy or engaging in CBT and their progress seems minimal compared to my own.  That's just anecdotal evidence, but it's been very compelling evidence to me that CBT and therapy are integral to my success.

It's been almost a year since I started this journey.  I'm in a far better place than I ever imagined I'd be.  I have my bad days and my regressions, but I know that me at my worst now is still better than me at my best a year ago.  I try not to get complacent, and therapy helps with that.  I'm just darn glad I finally sucked it up and sought out a therapist.

In that topic, "date" around until you find a good therapist.  I went to one a few years back and had an *awful* time and decided that therapy wasn't for me.  Turns out that therapy just wasn't for me because the therapist I have now is *great*.  One of my friends tried six different therapists before finding one she liked.  Good for her for shopping around until she found someone she liked.
